[HEP] HEP Purpose, Policy, and Guidelines (#395)
holoviz/holoviz: hep/hep0.md

<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> link to the PR for the implementation, NA if not available </td></tr>
</table>

### Summary
The table should be followed by a **Summary** section.

### Specification
If a HEP is perscriptive in nature (providing explicit guidelines or rules to follow), a **Specification** or **Policy** section is required to convey the technical details of the proposed enhancement.

### Optional Sections
Some sections that may be
included if appropriate for the proposal include:

- **Motivation/Background**: Why the proposed change or formalization is needed.
- **Rationale**: Why particular decisions were made in the proposal.
- **Backwards Compatibility**: Will the proposed change break existing packages or workflows.
- **Alternatives**: Any alternatives considered during the design.
- **Sample Implementation/Illustration**: Links to prototype or a sample implementation of the proposed change.
- **FAQ**: Frequently asked questions (and answers to them).
- **Resolution**: A short summary of the decision process conducted with the community.
- **Reference**: Any references used in the design of the HEP.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe **Enforcement** (especially encouraging automation of enforcement e.g. in CI)? 

I suspect a lot of HEPs are proposals that we agree on but may forget to enforce appropriately if no mechanism is in place to ensure compliance. Maybe the default policy is 'memorize and review all HEPs before release' but that seems to be a lot to ask of maintainers imho...

Author: good idea. I added a 'compliance' suggested section.

<table>
<tr><td> Identifier </td><td> HEP 0 </td>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> HEP Purpose, Policy, and Guidelines </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Proposed </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Demetris Roumis </td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> March 18, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> March 19, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/pull/395#issuecomment-2007702201 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Summary

HEP 0 outlines the purpose, policy, and guidelines for future HEPs. This document aims to ensure that the process of proposing and implementing enhancements to the HoloViz ecosystem is clear, structured, and inclusive.

### What is a HEP?

> A HEP is a HoloViz Enhancement Proposal, a design document that provides information to the HoloViz community or proposes a change for which widespread attention and consensus is warranted. These changes can be technical or address the social aspects of the organization, like governance or conduct. HEPs should provide a concise specification and rationale for the proposed change. HEPs serve as the principal means for proposing significant changes to the HoloViz ecosystem, enabling the community to engage in informed decision-making while also documenting the proposals and the processes behind these decisions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A HEP is a HoloViz Enhancement Proposal, a design document requiring widespread attention and discussion that either proposes a specific change or else clarifies and codifies existing practice. These changes or codifications can be technical or address the social aspects of the organization, like governance or conduct. HEPs should provide a concise specification and rationale for the proposed change. HEPs serve as the principal means for proposing significant changes and formalizations for the HoloViz ecosystem, enabling the community to engage in informed decision-making while also documenting the proposals and the processes behind these decisions.
```

HEPs are maintained as text files using Markdown for formatting in the [HoloViz/HoloViz](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz) repository. Their revision history is a historical record of the proposed change.

## Policy
### Core Developers

> There are several references in this HEP to 'core developers'. This refers to the currently active HoloViz core team members, collectively described by the combined MEMBERS.md files ([example](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/project-docs/MEMBERS.md

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several references in this HEP to 'core developers'. This term refers to the currently active HoloViz core team members, collectively described by the combined MEMBERS.md files ([example](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/project-docs/MEMBERS.md
```

)) in each of the HoloViz repositories. The core developers are reachable on HoloViz [GitHub](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz) or [Discord](https://discord.gg/rb6gPXbdAr) with the handle: `@holoviz-dev`.

### Steering Committee

> There are several references in this HEP to the 'steering committee'. The currently active HoloViz steering committee is in [STEERING-COMMITTEE.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md), and is governed by [CHARTER.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/CHARTER.md). The steering committee members are reachable on HoloViz [GitHub](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz) or [Discord](https://discord.gg/rb6gPXbdAr) with the handle: `@steering-committee`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several references in this HEP to the 'steering committee'. The currently active HoloViz steering committee is listed in [STEERING-COMMITTEE.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md), and is governed by [CHARTER.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/CHARTER.md). The steering committee members are reachable on HoloViz [GitHub](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz) or [Discord](https://discord.gg/rb6gPXbdAr) with the handle: `@steering-committee`.
```

### Workflow
#### Initiation

> The HEP process begins with an idea for a change in how HoloViz works. These changes can be technical or address the social aspects of the organization, like governance or conduct. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HEP process begins with an idea for how HoloViz works or should work, whether that is a change from current practice or an explicit declaration of current practice. These enhancements can be technical or address the social aspects of the organization, such as governance or conduct. 
```

> Before beginning to write a HEP, it is best to ascertain if the idea fits the intent of the HEP process and has a chance of acceptance. Informally vetting an idea publicly before going as far as writing a HEP is meant to save the potential proposer time. Small or uncontroversial changes often do not need a HEP and can be decided on in the [community channels](https://holoviz.org/community.html). Major or potentially controversial changes, such as those that require collaboration across multiple HoloViz projects, should be submitted as HEPs. When it is unclear if a change is suited for a HEP, ask HoloViz core developers to provide guidance. For example, the 'new-contributors' Discord channel is open to the public and a good place to ask.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before beginning to write a HEP, it is best to ascertain if the idea fits the intent of the HEP process and has a chance of acceptance. Informally vetting an idea publicly before going as far as writing a HEP is meant to save the potential proposer time. Small or uncontroversial changes often do not need a HEP and can be decided on in the [community channels](https://holoviz.org/community.html). Major or potentially controversial changes, such as those that require collaboration across multiple HoloViz projects, are expected to be submitted as HEPs. When it is unclear if an enhancement is suited for a HEP, ask HoloViz core developers to provide guidance. For example, the 'new-contributors' Discord channel is open to the public and a good place to ask.
```

#### Drafting
Once the proposer has confirmed with the HoloViz core developers that an idea has any chance of acceptance, a draft HEP should be written following the format described below. Drafting can take place in a pull request to the HoloViz/HoloViz repository, but the status should be changed to 'draft' while working.

> HEPs should focus on a single issue; broad changes should be split into multiple well-focused HEPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HEPs should focus on a single issue; broad topics for discussion should be split into multiple well-focused HEPs.
```

#### Submission and Consensus-Building 

> Once complete, this draft should be submitted as a pull request to the HoloViz/HoloViz repository with the status changed to 'proposed'. At this point, all members of the HoloViz community are welcome and encouraged to participate in the review in a civil and respectful manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once complete, the draft HEP should be submitted as a pull request to the HoloViz/HoloViz repository with the status changed to 'proposed'. At this point, all members of the HoloViz community are welcome and encouraged to participate in the review in a civil and respectful manner.
```

> The HEP proposer is responsible for following the discussion on the pull request, answering questions, making updates to the proposal as part of the consensus-building process, and documenting dissenting opinions. In general, the goal is to make sure that the community has consensus, not provide a rigid policy for people to try to game. When in doubt, err on the side of asking for more feedback and looking for opportunities to compromise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HEP proposer is responsible for following the discussion on the pull request, answering questions, making updates to the proposal as part of the consensus-building process, and documenting dissenting opinions. In general, the goal is to make sure that the community reaches consensus, not to provide a rigid policy for people to try to game. When in doubt, err on the side of asking for more feedback and looking for opportunities to compromise.
```

When the proposer determines that the HEP is ready, they must notify the HoloViz core developers that it is ready for a formal review (e.g., in a comment on the pull request, using `@holoviz-dev`). This message must also describe any major points of contention and how they were resolved. 

#### Review and Resolution

> A HoloViz core developer will then formally review the pull request for format, scope, and evidence of consensus. They may also notify other interested parties to weigh in on the HEP. If consensus is reached, the HoloViz core developer will update the status of the pull request, assign a HEP number, add a link to the discussion in the [HEP table](accepted_heps.md), and merge it. All HEPs will be resolved as either 'rejected', 'accepted', or 'deferred' depending on the consensus of the community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A HoloViz core developer will then formally review the pull request for format, scope, and evidence of consensus. They may also notify other interested parties to weigh in on the HEP. If consensus has been reached, the HoloViz core developer will update the status of the pull request, assign a HEP number, add a link to the discussion in the [HEP table](accepted_heps.md), and merge it. All HEPs will be resolved as either 'rejected', 'accepted', or 'deferred' depending on the consensus of the community.
```

> In unusual and controversial cases, a HoloViz core developer may ask the steering committee to take a HEP up for vote, following the policies described in [CHARTER.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/CHARTER.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In unusual and controversial cases where consensus has not been possible to achieve, a HoloViz core developer may ask the steering committee to take a HEP up for vote, following the policies described in [CHARTER.md](https://github.com/holoviz/holoviz/blob/main/doc/governance/org-docs/CHARTER.md).
```

## HEP Format

All HEPs should begin with a top-level table with the following information:

<table>
<tr><td> Identifier </td><td> [Number to be assigned by HoloViz Developer upon HEP acceptance] </td>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> A short title of the proposal </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft | Proposed | Accepted | Rejected | Deferred | Implemented | Superseded </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Full Name [email is optional] </td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> March 15, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> March 15, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> link to the issue where the HEP is being discussed, NA before submission </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> link to the PR for the implementation, NA if not available </td></tr>
</table>

This table should be followed by a **Summary** section and then
additional sections as needed by the proposal. Some sections that may be

> included if appropriate for the proposal include.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
included if appropriate for the proposal include:
```

>     * Specification/Policy -- The technical details of the proposed change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Specification/Policy -- The technical details of the proposed enhancement.
```

>     * Motivation -- Why the proposed change is needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Motivation -- Why the proposed change or formalization is needed.
```
